---
dg-publish: true
aliases:
  - Regions and FRQs
---
2023-10-17  
04:01
Status: #SocialStudies/APHG/note 

Tags: [[* archived/old garden/Learning/--/400 Social Studies/index]] [[FRQ]]
# What is an [[FRQ]]?

An [[FRQ]] is a **Free Response Question**. On the [[* archived/old garden/Learning/--/400 Social Studies/index]] exam, there are two types of questions. **Half of the exam score comes from multiple choice (a, b, c, d, e), half of the exam score comes from free response questions.**

Each **[[FRQ]] is broken up into 7 parts (a-g)**. Each part **has its own prompt that needs to be answered. Even if you write correct information, if it doesn’t address that prompt, it doesn’t score points!**

---
# [[Formal Region]]

A [[Formal Region]] is an area that has **striking similarities in terms of one or a few physical or cultural features, or is officially drawn by governmental organizations.**

Ex. **Trophy Club, Denton County, Texas, United States of America
	These are drawn by governmental organizations.**
Ex. **“Muslim-majority countries”, “English-speaking world”, “Francophone area”.
	These are areas of **striking similarity**-- it so happens that most people in the [[Region]] either (1) are Muslim, (2) speak English, or (3) speak French. There can be some **exceptions-- some non-Muslims in those countries, or some people who don’t speak English in English-majority countries, or the same for French.** **But the [[Region]] can be found by identifying where the trait is overwhelmingly present.**

---
# [[Functional Region]]

[[Functional Region]]s are areas **organized around cores, or nodes.** Visually, **the space can be seen as having interdependent parts that all operate together and connect, but with a center that directs the movements and characteristics of non-central parts.** It is **defined by the particular set of activities or interactions that occur within it.**

**Ex. “DFW”, “100.3 Jack FM”, “Fort Worth Star-Telegram”, “BNHS Feeder Zone”**

You can see these regions based on the **node** and then the activity that **spreads from that node.**

- “DFW” is the name for the general area around Dallas/Fort Worth, defined by people’s commutes into Dallas or Fort Worth. **You see the borders are very gradual, where once you get to the further edges, you have less and less people who come to Dallas or Ft. Worth for business.**
- I**f you tune to 100.3 around here, you get the Jack FM radio station, but if you go about 20 miles west, it’ll change.**
- **The Fort Worth Star-Telegram is a newspaper written in Ft. Worth, but delivered to around 20 nearby counties.**
- BNHS is the “**node**”, but students **come from homes in a much wider area… and some outside that (Academies!)**

---
# [[Perceptual Region]]

A [[Region|region]] that only **exists as a conceptualization or an idea and not as a physically demarcated entity.** [[Perceptual Region]]s are **not as rigorously structured as formal and [[Functional Region]]s.** Instead, they are **places that people believe to exist as a part of their cultural identity.** They **reflect feelings and images more than any objective reality,** **such as physical features, formal political boundaries, or economic centers.**

EX: **The South, Korea, The Bible Belt, Chinatown**

- What is “**The South**”? It depends who you ask. **Texas may be in the South, but many Mississippians or Alabamans would not agree.** It’s **defined by a loose history, cultural similarities, but there’s also a lot of difference.** **South = barbeque, old Cotton states, Confederacy, (historically) voting Democratic? Or maybe not?**
- The [[Formal Region]]s of North Korea and South Korea are countries, **but the whole peninsula shares a sense of shared [[Ethnicity]] and history.** **“Korea” is not officially defined, it is felt.**
- **The Bible Belt is a [[Region|region]] of the US perceived as being overwhelmingly [[3.9 - Geography of the Abrahamic Religions IP#Christianity|Christian]], despite being more diverse.**
- “**Chinatowns” are found in many cities, areas once (or still) dominated by families of Chinese (or other East Asian) immigrants.**
---