---
dg-publish: true
aliases:
  - Article Analysis Skills
---
2023-10-17  
20:28
Status: #SocialStudies/APHG/note 

Tags: [[* archived/old garden/Learning/--/400 Social Studies/index]]
# SPEED
The letters of **SPEED** stand for **social, political, economic, environmental, and demographic**.

Often in either multiple choice OR [[FRQ]] questions, students will be asked to select an answer specific to one of these categories, such as “...an economic factor leading to ________ would be….” or “Explain ONE demographic cause of___" .

When answering these questions, if you provide a correct factor or cause, but not the right TYPE of factor or cause, your answer will not be correct, because it doesn’t answer the question or prompt you were provided.

---
# Social
Having to do with **society: culture, people’s attitudes, beliefs, entertainment, religion,** etc.
- Sarah wears a hijab, which is common for some practicing Muslim women. 
- Thomas prefers to play video games, rather than watching movies.
- Doli speaks Macedonian with her mother.
---
# Political
Having to do with **law, government and the political process: bills, laws, regulations, court decisions, bans, etc**.
- Fred is required to apply for a license to be able to drive a car.
- The court decided that the 14th Amendment applied the rights of the first ten amendments to the states.
- Cocaine dealing is illegal in the United States.
---
# Economic
Having to do with **finances and the economy: money, jobs, production, industry, costs, etc.**
- Marie picked up an extra job babysitting for her parents’ friends because she wanted to buy a fancy Prom dress.
- The United States produces more advanced technological goods, rather than simple to manufacture products.
- Gas prices are much higher now due to increased demand and decreased supply.
---
# Environmental
Having to do with the **physical environment: climate, topography, [[Absolute Location]], pollution, etc.**
- Many areas are experiencing desertification, where they become increasingly arid and dry with minimal rainfall.
- Mexico City is located in a mountainous highland [[Region]].
- Pollution is higher in densely populated industrial areas.
---
# Demographic
Having to do with the **growth or change in populations; ages, ethnicities, races, etc.**
- Bangladesh had a very high number of children born per woman for a long time, so they are still growing fairly rapidly.
- China is slowly decreasing in population as a result of the long period of very low birth rates.
- Many European countries are experiencing increased [[Immigration]] from North Africa.
---

https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1LRE1ZECMbYtr_RG61sbALicXNqcpI31UB-LCPMunaOs/edit#slide=id.g15dad27df40_0_0