---
dg-publish: true
---
2024-01-11  
13:39
Status: #HealthScience/PHS/note  
Links: [[Principles of Health Science]]
# Ethical Roles and Responsibilities of a Health Care Worker  
When you began your externship at Mercy Hospital, you examined their mission statement. It underscored the reason the hospital existed.  **It clearly stated the level of superior care it expected to deliver, and the training it would provide to healthcare practitioners so they could deliver that care.** ==Physicians take a Hippocratic Oath where they promise to uphold specific ethical standards==. One of the most important things a healthcare practitioner can learn to do is to navigate through difficult circumstances while maintaining these standards. [[ethics]] seeks to determine what a person should do, or the best course of action, and attempts to help people decide how to behave and treat one another. Ethical discussions include questions such as, **“Which actions should be permitted?” or “Which action is best?”**. Advancement in medicine creates new problems. How will the recipient of an organ be chosen? Who will be allowed to receive experimental drugs? How will the creation of in vitro embryos be ethically managed? Does a terminally ill patient have the right to assisted death (euthanasia)? Ethical issues in medicine will constantly arise as new treatments are discovered and sadly as dwindling healthcare dollars force decisions on who will even receive these treatments. [[ethics]] are a set of beliefs about what is right and what is wrong. Some [[ethics]] are established by society. They determine how people are supposed to behave, usually in terms of human rights, responsibilities, and [[justice]]. **Some [[ethics]] are personal and based on what you believe to be positive character traits, such as honesty, compassion, and loyalty. Some [[ethics]] are established by groups of people, such as health care workers or members of a professional organization.** Think of examples of organizations to which you belong that have a code of [[ethics]]. For example, you might be a member of a student organization that has a code of [[ethics]] that outlines the acceptable behaviour and responsibilities given to members.
# Value Indicators 
==Health care workers are expected to live by values that show others respect. You show respect by treating others with dignity, demonstrating a spirit of service, performing your duties with excellence, and treating others fairly.== **Medical [[ethics]] dates back to the Hippocratic Oath, which is widely believed to have been written by Hippocrates in the 4th century.** One of the earliest principles to come from this oath is to “first, do no harm.”  Western medical [[ethics]] have evolved to include values derived from the Muslim, Jewish, and Christian religions, including noted thinkers such as al-Razi, Maimonides, and Thomas Aquinas. In recent times, professional codes of medical [[ethics]] have incorporated legal principles to more formally spell out what conduct is expected of health care workers. Each person determines how values are reflected in his or her day-to-day actions. An employer describes what values are important and how to demonstrate them while working. These descriptions are usually found in an employee handbook or policy and procedure book. Common values that are emphasized in the workplace are described below:
- **Dignity**. **==You treat people with dignity when you are honest, truthful, trustworthy, sincere, and respectful. Always do what is needed to the best of your abilities, and ask for assistance when tasks are beyond your understanding or ability.==** Dignity is communicated through active listening, being clean, being positive, showing understanding, and being respectful of all people.
- **Service**. ==Service means responding to patients/clients and co-workers with an understanding of their unique needs.== You show kindness and patience, and make comments that are positive, courteous, and helpful.
- **Excellence**. ==Performance excellence is taking responsibility for yourself, your team’s decisions, and the results.== You adapt to changing needs by learning new skills, knowledge, and behaviours that encourage continuous improvement. Accepting and seeking feedback help you improve your performance excellence.
- **Fairness/[[justice]]**. ==You treat all people with mutual respect and provide the same dignity, service, and performance excellence regardless of the patient’s [[Race]], beliefs, ethnic background, or financial resources.== You also use supplies and available resources effectively to provide appropriate care and a safe environment for everyone.
## Patient or Customer Satisfaction
Patients and clients are more than citizens with rights. They are also customers buying goods and services. Patient and customer satisfaction is an essential element in providing effective health care. Demonstrating the values of service and excellence helps patients and their families feel satisfied with the care they receive. They are told: 

- What is needed
- When it will be provided
- Why it’s needed
- How it will be provided
- Who will provide the service

When a patient’s expectations are not met, there are consequences. The patient may change doctors or refuse to receive treatment from a particular health care professional in a facility. Changing caregivers can compromise a patient’s care. In addition, the loss of a patient—or customer—is detrimental to a health care facility’s business. Besides losing that patient’s business, he or she may spread negative comments about the unsatisfactory care through word of mouth. To avoid negative consequences, focus on communicating successfully and respecting patients/clients.
# Recognising and Reporting Illegal and Unethical Behaviour
## Recognising Reportable Incidents
Health care workers are responsible for helping to protect everyone in the work environment. If you suspect illegal behaviour or unethical conduct, that incident must be reported. A reportable incident is any event that can adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of patients/clients, co-workers, and others within your place of work. There are many ways a healthcare worker’s behaviour can have negative or adverse effects. Here are a few examples:
- A nurse might administer the wrong medicine 
- A cleaning person might unplug important equipment
- A doctor might [[harass]] another employee
- An administrator might misuse hospital funds 
- An employee might disclose a patient’s condition to a reporter 
There is no set list of reportable behaviours. Rather, it is required and expected that every employee will:
- Obey the laws of the city, state, and federal government 
- Fulfil his or her job requirements to the best of his or her ability, including following a code of [[ethics]] and respecting others 
- Treat everyone in the hospital environment with care, dignity and respect
## Reporting Illegal and Unethical Behaviour
Reporting an illegal or unethical incident helps ensure the health, safety, and welfare of everyone in the hospital environment. Follow your employer’s policy regarding how you report illegal and unethical incidents.   The policy should be clearly outlined in the employee manual. If your employer does not provide an employee manual, consult with your immediate supervisor or the human resources department.
## Consequences of Illegal and Unethical Behaviour
Illegal and unethical behaviours may result in an employee being put on probation or fired. Illegal behaviour can result in criminal charges or a civil lawsuit. In some cases, an employee who has exhibited unethical behaviour will be required to take specialised training to better understand the behaviour they are expected to exhibit in the workplace.
# Medical [[Ethics]] Socratic Seminar
Four basic moral principles must be explored when discussing medical [[ethics]]:
- **[[respect for autonomy]]** – the patient has the right to refuse or choose their treatment.
- **[[beneficence]]** – a practitioner should act in the best interest of the patient.
- **[[non-maleficence]]** – to not be the cause of harm.
- **[[justice]]** – concerns the distribution of scarce health resources, and the decision of who gets what treatment.