---
dg-publish: true
---
2024-01-29  
13:42
Status: #HealthScience/PHS/note
Links: [[Principles of Health Science]]
# [[Circulatory System]]
[[Temperature]] (T), [[pulse]] (P), [[respiratory rate]] (RR), and [[blood pressure]] (BP) measurements are considered vital signs because they measure some of the body's vital functions and provide necessary information about the patient's physical well-being.

---
>[!tip]- 
>Vital signs are indicators of the body's ability to maintain homeostasis. 

---
## Introduction to the [[Circulatory System]]
**Circulation is the continuous one-way movement of blood throughout the body.** ==All the systems and organs depend on the circulatory system.== **[[artery|Arteries]] carry blood with [[Oxygen]] and nutrients to each [[Cell]],** *and veins carry away the [[Cell|cell’s]] [[waste products]].* If the circulation is not enough, [[Cell|cells]] die. When the [[Cell|cells]] die, tissues begin to die, and the organs stop working properly.
### Types of Blood Vessels
- **[[Arteries]]** carry blood away from the [[Heart]] to all parts of the body. [[artery|Arteries]] carry [[oxygenated]] blood, except for the [[pulmonary artery]]. The pulmonary [[artery]] carries [[deoxygenated]] blood.  
- **[[Arterioles]]** are small [[artery|arteries]] that connect [[artery|arteries]] with capillaries.  
- **[[Capillaries]]** have very thin walls that allow nutrients, [[Oxygen]], and [[Carbon Dioxide]] to move in and out of the blood.
- **[[Venules]]** are small veins that connect veins with capillaries. 
- **[[Veins]]** carry blood from all the different parts of the body and return it to the [[Heart]]. Veins carry [[deoxygenated]] blood, with the exception of the [[pulmonary vein]]. The [[pulmonary vein]] carries [[oxygenated]] blood. Veins have valves that keep the blood from to the [[Heart]].
	- “Nice and Skinny”