---
quickshare-date: "N/A"
quickshare-url: "Removed"
dg-publish: true
---
2024-02-05  
13:13
Status: #HealthScience/PHS/note
Links: [[Principles of Health Science]]
# Introduction to the [[Respiratory System]]
Respiration is breathing. Breathing is necessary to supply life-giving [[Oxygen]] to each cell in the body and to remove the [[waste products]] of each cell. The cell's gaseous waste product is called [[Carbon Dioxide]]. [[Oxygen]] enters the body when air is pulled in through the mouth and nose. This process is called [[inspiration-inhalation|inspiration/inhalation]]. [[expiration-exhalation|Expiration/exhalation]] occurs when the body forces air out of the [[Lungs]]. This is the body’s way of eliminating the cells’ gaseous waste ([[Carbon Dioxide]]).
# Structures of the [[Respiratory System]]
The [[nasal cavity]] ([[nose]]) is where air enters the body. The [[nasal cavity]] is the preferred passage for air to enter the body. The nasal lining helps stop dust particles and pathogens. If dust and pathogens enter the [[Lungs]], the chance for infection is increased.

Paranasal sinuses are mucus-lined cavities in the bones of the face, connected by passageways to the nose, which help to warm and moisten inhaled air. When drainage from the sinuses is blocked, as after a cold, they can become infected (a condition called sinusitis).
- [[Oral cavity]] (mouth) is where air enters the body when the nasal passage is blocked or when a person breathes through the mouth.
- [[Pharynx]] (throat) is the passageway that air enters after leaving the [[nose]] and [[mouth]]. 
- [[Epiglottis]] is a flap that closes when food or [[Dihydrogen Oxide|water]] is swallowed. When it closes, it covers the opening of the [[trachea]] that leads to the [[Lungs]]. This prevents food and [[Dihydrogen Oxide|water]] from entering the [[lungs]].
- [[Larynx]] (voice box) is located just below the [[epiglottis]]. It is a pouch containing a cordlike framework that creates voice sounds.
- [[Trachea]] (windpipe) is the passageway between the [[Pharynx|pharynx]] and [[Lungs]].
- [[Bronchi]] are air passageways that connect to the [[trachea]].The [[trachea]] divides into two main branches, the [[bronchial tubes]] that lead into the right and left [[Lungs]].
- [[Bronchial tubes]] are lined with hairlike objects called [[cilia]]. The [[cilia]] help move mucus, which catches dust and pathogens, up and out of the [[Lungs]].
- [[Bronchioles]] are the smallest subdivisions of the [[bronchi]].
- [[Alveoli]] (air sacs) are at the end of each [[bronchioles|bronchiole]]. Thee [[alveoli]] are covered with capillaries that absorb [[Oxygen]] into the blood. [[Carbon Dioxide]] is forced out of the blood into the [[alveoli]] ([[Carbon Dioxide]] and [[Oxygen]] exchange). Once the [[Carbon Dioxide]] has been released into the [[alveoli]], it can be exhaled from the body.
- [[Diaphragm]] is the muscular wall that divides the chest cavity from the abdominal cavity. To begin [[inspiration-inhalation|inspiration]], the [[diaphragm]] moves down, creating a vacuum that pulls air into the [[Lungs]]. When the [[diaphragm]] relaxes and moves upward again, air is exhaled (forced out) from the [[Lungs]].