---
dg-publish: true
---
2024-03-20  
13:13
Status: #HealthScience/PHS/note
Links: [[Principles of Health Science]]
# Introduction to the [[Nervous System]]
Another major human body system whose malfunction can result in the need for intensive care is the nervous system. The nervous system is a delicate system of [[Neuron|nerve cells]] (or [[Neuron|neurons]]) linked together to receive [[stimuli]] and to respond to [[stimuli]]. [[Stimuli]] are anything that cause a reaction or response (e.g., when your hand touches a hot object or when something flies into your eye). Response is the reaction to the [[stimuli]] (e.g., moving your hand when it touches something hot or tears in the eye when something flies into it). The nervous system is divided into two parts: the **[[central nervous system]]** and the **[[peripheral nervous system]]**.

The **[[central nervous system]] (CNS)** includes the brain and the spinal cord. Nerves of the spinal cord carry messages to and from the brain. The brain has three main parts:  
- The **[[cerebrum]]** processes thought having to do with memory and learning. It controls voluntary movements and sense interpretation.  
- The **[[cerebellum]]** coordinates muscle activity and balance so that muscles function smoothly.  
- The **[[medulla]]**, a part of the brainstem, controls breathing, heartbeat, circulatory action, and digestive movements.  

The **[[peripheral nervous system]]** **(PNS)** includes the nerves and [[ganglia]] outside the brain and spinal cord. ere are:  
- 12 pairs of cranial nerves  
- 31 pairs of spinal nerves 
- Various nerve branches in body organs

All parts of the central and [[peripheral nervous system|peripheral nervous systems]] work together to relay messages to the brain. Each message is carried to the correct area of the brain by its specialized [[neuron]] or [[neuron|nerve cell]].

Each specialized [[neuron]] leads into a passage that delivers the message or [[stimuli]] to the brain or the spinal cord. The areas in the spinal cord that can receive messages cause an action or response to [[stimuli]] that does not require interpretation.The [[stimuli]] that are received by the brain are interpreted and cause a response.

This response can occur anyplace in the body but is most easily recognized in the sense organs. For example, sound waves are received by the **[[Ears]]**; light rays are received by the **[[Eyes]]**; the **[[nose]]** and **[[tongue]]** respond to smell and taste; and the nerve endings throughout the body respond to pressure, heat, cold, pain, and touch. The following are the sensory organs of the body.

## The [[Eyes|Eyes]] 
The eye provides vision. It is a ball-shaped organ located in the eye orbit of the skull
### **Protection for the Eye**  
- The lids and eyelashes aid in protecting the eye. 
- The tears from the [[lacrimal duct]] help wash away foreign matter.
### **Parts of the Eye**  
- The **[[sclera]]**, or the white of the eye, is the outer lining.
- The front portion of the [[sclera]] is clear and is called the cornea, or the “window of the eye.” 
- The **[[choroid]]**, the second coating, is heavily pigmented to keep light rays from scattering 
- The **[[retina]]**, the innermost coating of the eye, houses the mechanisms that sense vision.- The **[[optic nerve]]**, located at the back of the eye, receives a picture and sends it to the brain for interpretation.
## The [[Ears|Ear]]
The ear provides hearing and equilibrium. The ear can be divided into three main parts: 
1. The **external ear** includes the following: 
	- **[[Auricle]]**, or outside projection 
	- **[[External auditory canal]]** 
	- **[[Tympanic Membrane|Tympanic membrane]]** or [[Tympanic membrane|eardrum]], which separates the external and middle ear  
2. The **[[middle ear]]** is an air space that contains three bones or [[ossicles]]. These bones amplify sound waves received by the [[tympanic membrane]]. 
3. The **[[inner ear]]** contains the semicircular canals, which transmit sound waves received from the [[middle ear]] to the nerves that allow us to translate sound. The [[inner ear]] is also responsible for equilibrium.

