---
dg-publish: true
---
2024-04-12  
08:56
Status: #HealthScience/PHS/note
Links: [[Principles of Health Science]]

The [[World Health Organization]] defines health as follows: ==“Health is a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.”== This definition of health has been expanded with the recent growth and emphasis on holistic health. *Today we think in terms of the body working as a unit (mental, physical, spiritual)* to maintain and promote optimum [[wellness]] through daily actions. [[Wellness]] is the overall feeling of well-being and the understanding that everything is going right in your life. In health care, holistic refers to the well-being of the whole person. It is important to meet physical needs as well as mental and spiritual needs when giving care. Holistic health care is a part of the [[wellness]] approach, which encourages good health and a positive self-image. Understanding these needs helps you care for yourself and for your patients/clients.
# [[Wellness]] and Preventive Health Care
[[Wellness]] and preventive health care emphasize keeping patients well, and not waiting until they are ill, to provide treatment. ==The concept of [[wellness]] changes throughout the lifespan, and it is important to identify the concepts of wellness for each stage of the life span.==

For example, from infancy through early childhood, wellness reflects growth and development. For senior citizens, [[wellness]] reflects an ability to live an active and engaged lifestyle. Screenings are tests or examinations that are done to identify a disease or condition before symptoms appear.

Age, [[gender]], family history, and genetic risk factors are indicators as to whether or not a person should have particular screenings. This type of preventative care makes it easier to treat most diseases and conditions early, when treatment is often more successful.Health education is vital to helping clients maintain good health. 

A [[holistic]] approach includes all of the following sections: physical, mental, and spiritual health.
## Physical Fitness 
Physical fitness keeps us alert and energetic in activities of daily living. It gives us enough energy to enjoy leisure time and to respond when emergencies arise. It can be achieved through:  

- Routine physicals    
- Aerobic exercise  
- Adequate rest    
- Immunizations  
- Good nutrition    
- Well-baby checks  
- Good posture
-  Elimination of body wastes
-  Weight control  
- Avoiding risky behavior, including the use and abuse of substances such as alcohol and tobacco

Physical fitness is the result of regular exercise, proper diet and nutrition, and proper rest for physical recovery. Physical exercise is bodily activity that develops and maintains physical fitness and overall health. This helps to strengthen muscles and the cardiovascular system, and to boost the immune system. Exercise helps prevent heart disease, cardiovascular disease, [[diabetes]], and obesity. It also improves mental health and helps prevent depression. Besides exercise, correct posture is a simple but very important way to keep the back and spine healthy. It is more than cosmetic—good posture and back support are critical to reducing the incidence and levels of back pain and neck pain.
### Nutrition
A diet is all of the food consumed by a person. Dietary habits are the decisions an individual or culture makes when choosing what foods to eat. Each culture holds some food preferences and some food taboos. Individual dietary choices may be more or less healthy, but proper nutrition requires the appropriate intake and absorption of vitamins, minerals, and fuel in the form of [[carbohydrates]], [[proteins]], and fats. Dietary habits and choices play a significant role in health and mortality, since deficiencies, excesses, and imbalances in diet can produce negative impacts on health, which may lead to diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, scurvy, obesity, or osteoporosis

To make healthy choices, you need to know what your body needs. Diet is the food you eat. Nutrition is a science that studies the way the food you eat nourishes your body. When you eat a healthy diet and have good nutrition, your body is getting what it needs to work at its best level. Different foods contribute different nutrients—the parts of food that your body requires. Recognizing that food is a resource you can use to stay healthy and happy can help you choose the best foods and food combinations and maintain a healthy diet.

A healthy diet is one that gives your body balanced nutrition. Like a car, if you give your body the right fuel, it will run great and last a long time. If you give it the wrong fuel, it might break down. To achieve a healthy diet, you should eat a balanced variety of foods from different food groups.

Other basic guidelines include:  

- Eating a variety of fruits and vegetables, including dark green vegetables, yellow vegetables, and beans  
- Eating foods that are rich in [[calcium]], such as low-fat milk, cheese, and yogurt 
- Eating whole grains  
- Eating lean meats, fish, poultry, and nuts  
- Limiting the amount of fats, salts, and sugars that you eat  
- Drinking plenty of [[Dihydrogen Oxide|water]]
### Substance Abuse
The impact of substance abuse, including tobacco, alcohol, and drugs, crosses all societal boundaries and affects both genders, every [[Ethnicity|ethnic group]], and people in every tax bracket. Smoking tobacco particularly damages the respiratory and the circulatory systems. Regular use results in diseases that cause death or severe disability. During pregnancy, chemicals from the tobacco smoke pass through the mother’s blood to the baby through the placenta and reduce the [[oxygen]] and blood flow to the baby. 

Excessive alcohol use increases the risk of many harmful health conditions, such as unintentional injuries, including traffic injuries or falls. It is associated with violence, child neglect, and risky sexual behavior. In addition, alcohol poisoning can occur, which is a medical emergency that results from high blood alcohol levels that suppress the [[central nervous system]] and can cause loss of consciousness, low blood pressure and body temperature, coma, respiratory depression, and death. Long-term alcohol problems include chronic disease and neurological impairments. During pregnancy, miscarriage, stillbirth, and a combination of physical and mental birth defects that last throughout life can occur. 

Drug abuse is defined generally as the use of a psychoactive drug or performance enhancing drug for a non-therapeutic or non-medical effect. Some of the most commonly abused drugs include alcohol, amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, cocaine, methaqualone, and opium alkaloids. Use of these drugs may lead to criminal penalties in addition to physical, social, and psychological harm.
Mental fitness allows us to interact effectively with others and to feel balanced.  Mental fitness manifests in a positive self-image. Mentally healthy people:  
## Mental Fitness
Mental fitness allows us to interact effectively with others and to feel balanced.  Mental fitness manifests in a positive self-image. Mentally healthy people:

- Self-direct (being the captain of your own ship)  
- Have a sense of belonging  
- Trust their own senses and feelings  
- Accept themselves  
- Have high self-esteem  
- Practice stress management

[[Stress]] is what you feel when you have to handle more than you are used to. Often, your body responds in the same way as it would if you were in danger—[[hormones]] speed up your [[heart]], make you breathe faster, and give you a burst of energy. This is sometimes known as the fight-or-flight stress response. Some stress is normal and even useful; for example, it can help you win a race or nish an important job on time. But if stress happens too often or lasts too long, it can have negative effects on your well-being. You can experience headaches, an upset stomach, back pain, or trouble sleeping. It can weaken your immune system, making it harder to fight off disease. It can make you moody, tense, or depressed. Relationships may suffer, and you may not do well at work or school. To identify stressors, you have to know:  

- What event caused the stress  
- Why you feel stress  
- How much stress you are feeling  
- If you feel negatively or positively about the situation

Before you can control stress, you must determine what is causing it. So, you should:

- Identify the problem 
- Gather information or data
- List possible solutions 
- Make a plan   
- Act on your solution   
-  Evaluate the results  

In order to cope with stress, look for ways in which to reduce it, and learn healthy ways in which to relieve it. Some methods might include better time management, taking good care of your health, getting plenty of rest, regular exercise, not smoking, limiting alcohol intake, learning to say “no” if you are too busy, and asking for help. You can talk to family, friends, or a counselor. You can write down things that are bothering you, or nd other ways to express your feelings. Finally, take time to do something you enjoy or to relax yourself (yoga, massage, aroma-therapy, etc.). Also, manage the physical reaction to stress by breathing deeply, reflecting on the cause of stress, and choosing another way to react.