---
dg-publish: true
---
2024-08-17  
20:49
Status: #English/Rhet/note  
Links: [[OnRamps Rhetoric]]

- A [[controversy]] is a question that people debate

>[!info]- Crestview Park
Starting in 2015, you could find a number of signs on residential lawns in a small neighbourhood in North Austin:These signs belonged to people in the community, people who wanted to make a public park out of a piece of property once used to store materials for the local electricity provider, Austin Energy. When these signs popped up, Austin Energy had already agreed to go elsewhere. But the City of Austin had not firmly decided what to do with the property. ==A park seemed like a nice idea. Of course, “[[controversy]]” means something controversial, something people argue about==. And you might see nothing controversial about replacing an unsightly salvage yard with a public green space where kids can play, adults can exercise, and pets can roam free. But, if you learn more about the community, the city, and the circumstances, you see that people did argue about the question: ==Should the property in Crestview be converted into a park?==
>
==The future use of this property affected many different people with many different interests, beliefs, and values==. For some people—those owning homes in Crestview and wanting a place to walk their dogs, jog, or play with their kids—the park could provide a beautiful and relaxing space. But for others—developers who would like to build new stores and apartments—the empty property could provide an opportunity to make money.  The City of Austin had its own goals. In order to make the city more densely populated, the city wanted pedestrian and bike-friendly residences, a neighborhood that is easier to navigate in a car, and a more attractive space visible from the new train station just across the tracks from where “Crestview Park” might be located. Many who worked at the local elementary school wanted people to move to Crestview because new residents pay property taxes that contribute to the school’s budget. New residents also tend to have children. The elementary school had once been so severely under-enrolled that the school board considered closing it altogether. More property taxes and more students could protect the school from any threats of closure. ==Some people believed that the park would attract families from the new houses and apartments on the opposite side of the train tracks. Others believed that the park would attract vagrants from the dingy strip of highway just a block away.==
>
So, you see, there were different interests at play: Some community residents wanted a park. Some developers wanted to make money. Some city officials wanted attractive, pedestrian-friendly residential development. Some school employees and administrators wanted more students and a larger school budget. ==And there were different values at play as well==: Crestview residents and city officials cared about a beautiful (green) [[urban]] environment. Crestview residents and school employees cared about the local school. Real estate agents, builders, city officials, and school employees cared about building new homes and new retail space. Real estate agents and builders also cared about making money. Finally, there were different beliefs: some people thought a park would be filled with happy families and romping pets, yet others thought it would be filled with unsightly trash. ==As a result of the differences in interests, values, and beliefs, people disagree. And in the course of their disagreement, people make arguments.== For instance, the Crestview Park Coalition produced a website to organise community meetings and to express their desire for a new park. The City of Austin produced [a report](https://onramps.instructure.com/courses/4072741/files/292397356?wrap=1) [](https://onramps.instructure.com/courses/4072741/files/292397356/download?download_frd=1) about the various possibilities for the property. ==This [[controversy]] is finally headed toward a resolution, with the Austin City Council recently approving a redevelopment project that will include housing and a park.==
>
Like most real controversies, ==the [[controversy]] around the Crestview property can’t be reduced to simple binaries like “pro” and “con” or “point” and “counterpoint.”== There will always be ==at least two and often more than two sides to a [[controversy]]==. Sometimes, these can be easily distinguished as those people for some action and those against it. But often, ==the [[controversy]] is much more subtle and has many sides. When mapping such a [[controversy]], you have to look for its complexity to discover all the voices.==

---
[[1.1 - What is Rhetorical Pedagogy?]] — [[1.3 - What Makes a Public Controversy?]]