---
dg-publish: true
---
2023-11-28
19:02
Status: #Science/Biology/note
Tags: [[* archived/old garden/Learning/--/200 Science (Biology)/index]]
# How can we look at chromosomes
- We look at chromosomes in something called a *karyotype*
- A karyotype is an organized *profile* of a person’s chromosomes

>[!faq]-  What is a karyotype?
>A karyotype is simply a picture of a person's chromosomes.
>
>In order to get this picture, the chromosomes are isolated, stained, and examined under the microscope. Most often, this is done using the chromosomes in the white blood cells. 
>
>A picture of the chromosomes is taken through the microscope.  
>
>Then, the picture of the chromosomes is cut up and rearranged by the chromosome’s size. 
>
>The chromosomes are lined up from largest to smallest. A trained cytogeneticist can look for missing or extra pieces of chromosome.

>[!tip]- Homologous Chromosome 
> Chromosomes that have the genes for the same trait at the same location

## Chromosome Numbers
- Normally, humans have **46 chromosomes in each cell** 
- **23 from our mother** 
- **23 from our father** 
*Knowing these numbers is essential for scientists to tell if someone has a genetic disorder.*
- Since humans have 46 chromosomes that means they have 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes. 
- It is possible for a person to have more or less than 46 chromosomes
	- **This results in a genetic disorder**
- Chromosomes tell us
	- Whether or not an individual has a genetic disorder.
	- If there is a possibility that an unborn child could have a genetic disorder. 
	- If an unborn child will be male (XY) or female (XX).
# Karyotypes of Genetic Disorder
- Nondisjunction can cause people to have more or less chromosomes
- This happens when two chromosomes do not properly separate during the formation of gametes (meiosis). 
- ## Down Syndrome (Trisomy 21)
- **Extra chromosome on pair 21**
- Deep creases across palms of hands
- Upward slant to eyes
- Heart defects
- Poor vision
## Turner Syndrome
- 1 in every 2,500 females
- **Missing an “X” Chromosome**
- Short Stature
- Infertile
- ‘Webbed’ neck
- Heart Defects-constricted [[aorta]]
## Klinefelter’s Syndrome
- **Extra “X” chromosome for a Male (XXY)**
- Occurs only in males
- Long Arms and Legs 
- Weak Bones
- Low [[Testosterone]]
- Enlarged breast tissue